Hello, everyone. Welcome to a new episode of the
Center. I'm your host, as always, Ricardo Lopez, and
today I'm joined by Doctor Michael Axelrod. He's the
director of the Human Development Center and the professor
in the Department of Psychology at the University of
Wisconsin, Wisconsin Eau Claire. He's he's editor of Investigating
School Psychology, Pseudoscience, Fringe Science, and controversies. And that's
the book we're going to talk about today. So,
Doctor Axelrod, welcome to the show. It's a pleasure
to have everyone.
Thank you for having me.
So let me start by asking you perhaps a
general question. So in the book, you deal with
school psychology. What is school psychology exactly and how
does it relate to other subfields in psychology, like,
for example, educational psychology.
Mhm. So, school psychology is uh an applied field
in psychology. And so, uh, what school psychologists generally
do is provide Um, different types of services to
children or students, teachers, parents, um, even, uh, uh,
sort of even administrative level types of services. So
some of the services that are most common. Our,
uh, assessment services here in the United States, for
example, school psychologists often lead the assessment team to
make decisions regarding students and uh the um eligibility
for special education services. So assessment is a rather
large part of a school psychologist's job, but school
psychologists also provide uh intervention. Sometimes that's direct intervention.
Uh, COUNSELING, maybe some behavior intervention work, but also
school psychologists consult with others on general issues that
students would experience academic, behavior, developmental, social, emotional, all
sorts of things. So, school psychologists are often consulting
with teachers and administrators and parents. And then finally,
I think, uh, a more recent role for school
psychologists is looking at how schools can better teach
and educate students, so more of a systems level,
if you will, approach to um making things better
for kids. So that may be in the area
of school discipline, that may be in the area
of um different types of Uh, uh, curricula or
learning approaches. So school psychologists generally cover the gamut
as far as things that may be um expected
of, of schools to provide students. And how is
it different, uh, to other fields or other areas
of psychology? Well, one is it's applied. Um, IT'S,
uh, when you get a degree in school psychology
here in the United States, and I think it's
generally consistent around the world. When you get a
graduate degree in school psychology, um, you, you're usually
going to be working in schools, um. Um, AND
working with kids and teachers and administrators and parents.
Um, IT'S not necessarily a research type degree, although,
uh, and I'm sure we'll be talking about this
today. Research plays a really important role in terms
of what school psychologists do. Um, THE, the real
neat thing about school psychologists, elite school psychology, at
least for me, is it really integrates just about
every aspect of the field of psychology. So, obviously,
um, child psychology, adolescent psychology, developmental psychology, um, learning,
assessment, those are Uh, those are all aspects of
school psychology that sort of draw from other areas.
But there are also some pretty unique areas, uh,
learning and behavior analysis, for example, is a common
area in psychology, psychology that that school psychologists draw
from, uh, certainly like clinical psychology and counseling psychology.
Um, SOCIAL psychology, it's not uncommon for us to
talk about, um, so social psychological phenomena in, in
schools. Um, SO, as a field, it's really broad
and I think that's one of the, the real
neat things about it. You mentioned educational psychology. Um,
IT, it, that it, so that term is often
used, um, in, uh, places outside the United States
to describe essentially what school psychologists can do. Um,
SO oftentimes you'll hear an educational psychologist is working
in a school in Europe, for example, and doing
these kinds of things that I described, um. Here
in the United States, uh, educational psychology is more
of a research degree or a research field where
it's looking at how do we best use the
principles of psychology, all of those that I've already
mentioned, like development and learning and social psychology, but
how do we use all of the, the, the
knowledge that we have in psychology to uh best
educate children. And in fact, if I could put
a plug in, we're actually in the process of
working on a book that's very similar to the,
the school psych pseudoscience book. Uh, IT'S called Educational
Psychology, and it's more geared toward um those that
are going into teacher education programs, uh, and, and
those faculty that are teaching in teacher education programs.
And so why do you think that such a
book investigating school psychology and it, the pseudoscience, the
for science, and the controversy surrounding it was needed?
Yeah, that's, I think that's a really important question.
Um, THERE, there's a lot of observational data to
suggest that many of the practices that are happening
in schools, either delivered by school psychologists or even
delivered by uh others in schools, uh, teachers and
administrators. But there's a lot of, there's a lot
of observational evidence to suggest that many of those
things aren't very effective, or they don't work right,
or in some cases may be harmful. Um, BUT
there's also some empirical evidence to suggest that as
well. When we look at things like how to
best teach reading. There are lots of different approaches
to teaching children to read and the when we
sort of look at the data behind those approaches,
we find that some are Very effective and some
are not effective at all. And so we kind
of have this sense from not just uh what
we've seen, but also what we study that there
are a lot of things that are happening in
schools that, again, aren't effective and actually may be
harmful. Um, AND then, as far as school psychology
goes, um, cause I have always thought that, you
know, I trained as a school psychologist, you know,
almost 30 years ago. Uh, I thought, you know,
school psychologists, they're the, they're, they're in, in a
school setting, they're, they're trained to, to use evidence
and, and think critically and scientifically about, about the,
the practices that are happening. Um, BUT a few
years ago, we did a study here at, at
UWL Claire where we surveyed. Um, SCHOOL psychologists around
the state and ask them, uh, about their beliefs
regarding common myths, uh, or common practices in schools
and, and within child and adolescent psychology. And, um,
what we found was that Most of the myths.
School psychologists were able to identify. That was really
encouraging. And, and many of the, the, the, the
statements that were true, cause we also had some
true statements in our survey, um, reassuringly, school psychologists
were able to say, yeah, that I believe that
that's true. Um, BUT there were a few, a
few practices, a few myths that stood out that
actually the majority of school psychologists identified as true.
Um, AND one of them is actually in the
book, and that is, uh, drawings, children's drawings can,
uh, give us a, a, a sense of a
child's, uh, problems and sort of the underlying causes
of their problems. And so, um, that's something we
found in our, in our research, um, and I
actually wrote a little bit about it in our
book, and we have a chapter on it. Um,
BUT I was really discouraged by that finding. And,
and what was even more discouraging, I think, was
that the, what we found was, cause we looked
at, uh, school psychologists that had been trained more
recently versus school psychologists that had been in the
field for, say, 20 years or more. And what
we found was that there was no difference in
the two groups with regard to how many um
uh endorsed that particular myth is true. Suggesting that
even like newer school psychologists, folks that are that
are being trained now are still believing in practices
that were, were commonplace 30, 40, or 50 years
ago. And that was somewhat discouraging. The other discouraging
finding was that the level of education didn't matter.
So in the United States, you can have um
a master's degree uh in school psychology and be
in the schools, but you can also have a,
a, a doctoral degree, a PhD degree and work
in the schools. And so we were expecting that.
Uh, SCHOOL psychologists with more education would less likely
believe those myths, in particular this one about children's
drawings, and we did not find that. We found
that uh the same percent of uh people that
either had the master's or the PhD believed in
that particular myth. And so, I think those sorts
of things came out of, uh, or, or really
were the, the set the stage for this book.
Um, BUT I got, I've got to give a
lot of credit to my co-editor Steve Hop, um,
who's written a lot on pseudoscience in psychology and
um pseudoscience and particularly child and adolescent psychology. And
there's, there's a movement in, in, in the applied
psychology fields. So that would be school psychology, clinical
psychology, and counseling psychology to really um work on
uh removing these, these ineffective, uh, harmful pseudoscientific practices.
And so, I hopefully we'll be seeing more of
this type of work out there.
And uh what do you think makes education susceptible
to pseudoscience? Are there particular factors that play a
role in that?
Yes, I think there are, um, That, that Jason
Travers is a uh uh a, a, a researcher
here in the United States and he's, he's referred,
and, and others have done have referred to have
used this term as well, but he's referred to
uh education as a fad magnet. Uh, FOR pseudoscientific
practices. So that, uh, schools and educators are maybe
more susceptible than other professionals to, uh, believing in
nonsense, if you will, or engaging in pseudo-scientific practices.
And I think there's maybe two reasons behind that.
I, and, and they're, they're very, um, you know,
the, the people's hearts are in the right place.
Don't get me wrong. I don't want to vilify
the, the educators that may be uh uh engaging
in pseudo-scientific practices because I, again, I think their
hearts are in the right place. I think the,
the first, uh, potential reason is that people are
looking for, um, approaches that work. And so they,
they're willing to try anything sometimes. And we find
that, for example, in uh in the, the area
of autism. So, you know, working with children in
autism, with autism is very challenging. It's a very
challenging uh proposition, um. Working with kids with autism,
there, there's no overnight fix, of course, and in
fact, there's no fix. It's really just teaching kids
skills and, and managing their social emotional behavior. Um,
BUT the field of autism is just, um, Proliferated
with these pseudoscientific practices. And so, again, what I
think it is is it's, it's parents and, and,
and school psychologists and educators and other psychologists that
are really just, they want to help. And unfortunately,
sometimes the help that they are giving isn't the
help that's needed. So I think that's the first
reason. The second reason is there's just this antiquated
ways of thinking. Um, THAT we've, we've been doing
this forever and we're gonna continue to do this.
Um, THE, the, the, the first, uh, the first,
or I should say the second chapter in the
book is historical pseudoscience in school of psychology and
education and, and we talk about things like Dunn's
caps that That that goes back to, you know,
the, the, the Renaissance, when you look at like,
where Duns caps came from, and, yeah, OK, we
don't use Duns caps in schools today, but we
still shame children. And we still use those kinds
of approaches to manage behavior, and shaming kids, uh,
particularly publicly is not only ineffective, it's also quite
harmful. So I think there's this like, this, this
historical or this, we've always done it. Kind of
thinking that happens in schools, and things don't necessarily
change quickly sometimes.
And in the book, you also talk about some
cognitive errors and fallacies that are relevant to school
psychology. Would you like to tell us perhaps about
one or two of them just to illustrate what
you're talking about here?
Right, right. So there's, there's a whole host of
these sort of cognitive errors that we make as
humans. Um, THERE are also heuristics or shortcuts that
we, we have as humans in our thinking that
lead us into um potentially believing things that we,
we shouldn't believe in. Um, BUT, but specific to
like psychology or school psychology or the practice of
psychology in education. Um, THERE'S a few that stand
out, and I'll highlight 21 is this, this what
we call diagnostic overshadowing, and that's where we interpret
presenting problems based only on previous diagnoses. So, for
example, if we're working with a kid with attention
deficit hyperactivity disorder and we see uh a new
behavior emerge, Don't investigate it further on its own.
We just sort of say, well, that's probably because
the child has attention deficit hyperactivity disorder. So, we
almost like close ourselves off to understanding something in
potentially a whole new way. So that's one aspect
of diagnostic overshadowing. The other is, um, failing to
interpret like other potential causes. And so, uh, very
similarly, if we sort of think about a kid
with ADHD who may be um engaging in, um,
lots of avoidant behavior, uh, we, we quickly go
to say, well, that's because the kid has ADHD
when in fact, well, we also know that avoidant
behavior is common for kids that have anxiety. And
so, if we aren't open to these other possibilities,
I think we can, we can be really, um,
our, our, our assessment and our interpretation could, could
have lots of shortcomings. The other one that I
think is really important is what we call pathology
bias, and that's where we, there's a tendency to
um over pathologize or, or even just pathologize relatively
common problems. And a really good example of that
is this idea of the terrible twos. I don't
know if you've ever heard that term, the terrible
twos. So, um, toddlers, 2 year olds are sometimes,
um, Difficult to to manage. Um, PARENTS, um, have,
have used the term, the terrible twos to describe
these two year old kids that as they begin
to develop language, some of the words they use,
um, don't always meet with The cooperation standards that
a parent may have. So they, they, you know,
at about 1, between 1 and 2 years of
age, the child learns the word no and they
learn the impact of the word no on their
parents and the environment. So if the child has
a slice of cheese and, and is looking at
the parent and the parent says, you know, you
can't have that. The child says no and needs
it. Um. The, so there's this idea though that
that there's some pathology behind that, that these are
children that are on a trajectory that may uh
lead to uh more significant behavior problems. And actually,
what we find is that as I'm explaining this,
you're probably seeing that this is a very common
problem. Um, I'm not excusing the problem and there's
ways. That parents can work with their 2 year
olds and 3-year-olds to help them become more compliant,
but to suggest, for example, that that behavior is
indicative of a larger psychological problem is problematic. Um,
THE other one that, that stands out in as
a psychologist, one of the areas that I work
in uh in Closely, uh, is, um, bed wetting.
I work with a lot of children that wet
the bed. I do a lot of research on
that area. And that is a, it's a very
common problem. If you look at in the United
States, if you look at first grade students, so
you look at, uh, 6 year olds, um, roughly
25% of all boys will wet the bed at
least 2 nights a week. Um, SO, so hardly,
uh, uh, a unique problem, hardly a rare problem.
Um, Yet, we, we look at bed wetting in,
at least in our country here in the United
States, and we think, well, there's gotta be something
wrong with the child. There's something psychologically wrong with
the child. Who would wanna wet their bed every
night, almost like they're doing it on purpose. And
And what's happened is that they're, you know, going
way, way back, uh, to even Freud, there are
these very misleading interpretations of what, um, bed wetting
is about. And one interpretation is that it's the
child trying to get back at the parent for
harsh toilet training practices. Um, NO evidence of that
whatsoever. In fact, bed wetting is cause, it can
be caused, and this is rare, it could be
caused by um uh uh like a urinary tract
infection. But really, what bedwetting is, is it's an
immature set of muscles that surround the bladder. And
so at night, those muscles aren't as strong as
the muscles of the, of peers who don't wet
the bed and so they relax enough that then
the child um urinates uh when they're sleeping. Um,
But we've over pathologized that. We've, we've, we've taken
a, we've taken a problem that has a, uh,
uh, a physiological cause and we've created this. Psychological
cause that has no um no support in the
empirical research. So, uh, that's the pathology bias, and
we see that a lot in schools as well.
The examples I gave aren't necessarily, uh, school-based, but
we see that a lot in schools where, um,
for example, it's not uncommon for uh kids uh
when they're learning to To write and read, to,
um, mix B's and D's and P's and Q's.
Um, THEY look so similar. Um, YET we've, we've
gone off the rails there, and, and some people
would suggest, well, then that child has some type
of, uh, learning disability, when in fact, it's actually
quite common for children under the age Under the
age of about 10 or 11 to do that.
In fact, it's not uncommon for people to do
that even up into adulthood, where they are maybe
thinking about something else and trying to write, and,
and they maybe mix up their Ps and Q's
and B's and D's. So, um, those are just
two, I think that are pretty common, uh, at
least in the practice of school psychology and clinical
psychology.
Right. So earlier you referenced the historical example of
pseudoscience, the then SES. Let me just ask you
about two more. So, can you tell us about
the example of open classrooms? Yeah.
So, um, in the, I, I, I laugh at
this because, um, I, I grew up in, um,
outside of New York City, on the east coast
of the United States, and um, I, I went
to a school that had, um, no, the classrooms
had no walls. Uh, THEY, they, the walls they
had actually were bookcases. Um, AND, and what's interesting
is the, the person who wrote that particular chapter
for us, Scott Bellini, he grew up in, in
Southern California, just, just near Los Angeles. And the
school that he went to was the exact same
way, and we're the same age. We're, we're exactly
the same age. And so, um, I just found
that interesting cause I had thought, well, maybe this
is something that's very specific to certain parts of
the country, but no, it's not. It, it, it
happened like all over the country, and it came
from The idea that we should allow kids to
sort of um learn based on just exploring their
environment. And that if we put walls up in
schools, that limits the environment. Um, AND it, it
was, it was solely based on that, that theory.
The theory had never been empirically supported, um, and
in fact, the idea of open classrooms had never
been studied. So nobody had ever done the research
to say, well, yeah, open classrooms are actually more
effective at at having kids achieve compared to traditional
classrooms with walls. Um, BUT, you know, that this
is a great example of how, you know, an
idea takes off and then, you know, things go
crazy pretty quickly. And what happened was, schools, uh,
Uh, this, this happened, it started about the the
mid 1970s, and a lot of schools that had
been built before World War II were being demolished
in, in favor of new school buildings. Um, AND
so what we saw was these new school buildings
that were being built, were being built with this
open classroom concept or, or, or classrooms without walls.
And as I illustrated before, it was happening on
the West Coast and the east coast, and everywhere
in between. Um, WHAT actually ended up happening is
that naturally, teachers complained. Um, THE, the biggest complaint,
there were two huge complaints. The biggest one was
the noise. They just, there was so much noise
that you couldn't, um, you couldn't really get, get
the attention of the kids and teach. And the
second complaint was that teachers didn't know where their
kids were. They were, so yeah, they're looking for
a kid, uh, maybe it's time to, to go
to the cafeteria for lunch and you're, you're lining
your kids up, and there are 4 or 5
of them that are somewhere else. And they're in
this huge space, uh, but across the space. And
so teachers found this was a problem. What schools
did was they uh first started putting these, as
I said earlier, bookcases to separate the different schools
and the uh different classrooms, and then they were
getting, after that, they found that that wasn't very
helpful. So then they invested in um uh. Uh,
TEMPORARY partitions that they would put up, and then
finally today, they've, they've had to do some major
remodeling of those schools, or, or, or scrap them
all together and build schools that actually had some
walls in the classrooms. So there's the open classroom
concept.
And what about the self-esteem movement? How did it
impact uh school psychology?
Yeah, so the self-esteem movement's really interesting. It, it
came from some researchers in the 70s that had
found that um the self-esteem of children. Was it
was kind of an important thing, kind of an
important concept. Interestingly enough, that the definition of self-esteem
has never really been clarified in, in, you know,
40, 50 years. Um THE way these researchers in
the 70s thought of the, the idea of self-esteem
was, do you feel good about yourself? Um And
so they found they, they hypothesized that if we
have kids, we have children, students that are feeling
good about themselves, then they're more likely to do
better in school. And again, there was no evidence
of that whatsoever. Um So what happened was the
the there was this self-esteem movement. Now, some of
it also came out of the, the sort of
self-help. Um MOVEMENT that was like the late 60s
and early 70s where adults who were sort of
feeling the pressures of everyday life, um, you know,
the, the, the advice to them was, you know,
really work on yourself and become, you know, uh
the best person you can be and, and feel
good about yourself. And so there was some of
that influence as well. Um, WHAT happened was that,
that, uh, schools and school districts and states caught
sort of wind of this idea that if we,
if we just boost kids' self-esteem, will impact their
learning. In fact, the state of California spent millions
of dollars in the 70s to revamp their curricula
to include self-esteem programming. And uh the, and now
that we were, we were seeing that schools were
adopting these sort of self-esteem programs, we were able
to look at the relationship between self-esteem and student
achievement. And we, we found that either there was
no relationship, um, or that there was a negative
relationship. So that as kids' self-esteem was going up,
their academic achievement was going down. Um, THE intended
purpose of the self-esteem movement, at least in schools.
The other thing that that we learned was that
when we started to look at different groups of
people, um, different groups of, of kids and adolescents
that had high self-esteem, we learned that the, the,
the kids who had high self-esteem. We're not the
kids we wanted others to be like. So, for
example, kids that were gang members, they were reportedly
had the highest levels of self-esteem, whereas then kids
that were in um uh music and art, extracurricular
activities, they tended to have the lowest self-esteem, um.
But again, the, the definition of self-esteem was never
really um settled on. So, you know, how we
even interpret that is, is up for grabs.
Right, so that is about historical examples. Let's now
go through some of the domains, let's say that
you cover in the book with your co-authors that
are more contemporary. So what are zero tolerance policies
and do they work?
Mhm. So zero tolerance policies are, there's different ways
to sort of look at zero tolerance policies, at
least in the United States. We're starting to see
uh zero tolerance policies pop up in other parts
of the world. In fact, I was at a
conference this summer in Latvia and uh there was
some researchers talking about Zero tolerance policies. And so,
essentially what zero tolerance policies are, are, um, school-wide
discipline approaches where, um, if you, if you violate
the, the, the school discipline policy once, you're, you're
done, that you're, you're suspended. Um, SO there's zero
tolerance for misbehavior. Now, uh, you know, in, in
In theory, that there's some good ideas there that
that kids that may be dangerous um in a
school environment or kids that repeatedly violate school rules,
that may not be the best setting for them.
And so they're, they're in the United States, we
have alternatives. Schools, or if a, a, a student
has some significant psychiatric problems, you know, then there's,
um, residential programming for those kids. So, again, in
theory, this kind of makes sense. And again, I,
I don't know if I would say we'd want
to expel the child. We would just wanna look
for alternative placements for those kids. Um, Where the,
where the zero tolerance goes off the rails is
when we have a blanket statement or a blanket
um rule for everybody that if you engage in
these behaviors, you're out of the school. And so
there's just lots of these examples um where this,
where zero tolerance policies are almost Um, ridiculed. So,
for example, a student brought, there's an example of
a student, uh, a first grader, um, brought a
butter knife to school to, um, to butter something
or to put cream cheese on a bagel. I
don't remember the exact specifics. Um. And was, and
had no history of disciplinary problems before this, but
because the, the student, the first grader, brought a
little butter knife to school, he was expelled. Um,
THERE'S another example of, um, a, a, a child,
a young student, first, 2nd grader, who was, uh,
using a pen or pencil as a play gun,
you know, so, cho choo choo che, like that
kind of thing. Um, AND that kid was expelled
for that behavior. Now, I'm not suggesting that was
an appropriate behavior, but I would argue that expelling
that child for that behavior is probably extreme. Um,
WHAT we find in terms of the research is
really a couple of things. The first is that
zero tolerance policies don't reduce problems in schools. I
think that's the most important. I think the second
most important aspect is that they, that zero tolerance
policies um affect students disproportionately, meaning students of color
tend to um be affected by zero tolerance policies
more so than white students, and that's a problem.
And then the third issue is that schools that
have rather extreme zero tolerance policies also have poor
school climates and cultures, meaning students, when there's a
hot, when there's really extreme zero tolerance policies, students,
students don't feel good about their school.
Right. So now to get into a more delicate
subject, uh, suicide is one of the leading causes
of death among teens. So what are the most
common misconceptions about it and that would apply to
a school context and in this particular cases do
prevention programs work or not?
Yeah, that's good. I think the, the biggest myth
that I see schools uh and school personnel perpetuate
is the idea that talking about suicide will cause
suicide. Um, AND so what that leads to in
practice is we're just not gonna talk about it,
um, when in fact, kids have questions, um, younger
students have questions about what is it. Uh, OLDER
students oftentimes have questions about, um, you know, the,
the, the, the services or, or, or, or programs
that might be available for kids that are, um,
thinking about suicide. So for, for me anyway, I
think the, the, the biggest misconception in schools is
the idea that if you talk about suicide, it'll
cause suicide, and there's no evidence of that whatsoever.
Um, THE other piece, and it gets to your,
your question about prevention and thinking about intervention, um,
Generally speaking, universal suicide prevention programs are not effective.
So when we sort of look at the programs
that exist, uh, that are, that are delivered to
all students, uh, what we find is that, that
they, they're just not enough. To, um, decrease the
rates of suicide among, among kids and adolescents. Um,
AND when you think about that, that, that might
not be that surprising because you're, you're targeting a
large group of kids, many of whom have no
issues with suicide whatsoever. Um, AND you're not doing
enough perhaps for those kids that may be um
at risk for suicide. And so, what's recommended in
schools is a um is a couple of things.
One is maybe not necessarily a universal suicide prevention
program, but rather a universal meaning delivered to everybody,
um, social emotional learning program. So focusing on skills
like resiliency, friendship. Um, MANAGING your emotions when you're
angry or upset or frustrated, or disappointed or sad.
So, something of that nature, that's not focused just
on suicide, um, in fact, doesn't emphasize suicide in
the, in the programming, but rather, you know, how
do you, how do you become a resilient person
and how do you ask for help and how
do you develop positive relationships with, with peers and
How do you manage those emotions when they're really
intense? Um, AND what we find is actually those
programs are quite effective, uh, for kids, and, and
I'm saying delivered universally, so they're delivered to all
kids. Um, SO I, I would advocate for that
coupled with a really good screening program to, to
be able to identify kids who are at risk
for suicide and then funnel them to programs, uh,
or services that we know are effective. And a
lot of times those are gonna be more in
the category of individual therapy or maybe even inpatient
hospitalization, for example, but The point is we need
to have uh uh screening practices that are able
to identify those kids as early as possible. And
we're starting to get better at, um, not just
the implementation of those screening programs, but just finding
screening programs that are, that are um effective at
identifying those kids that, that need to be identified.
And what about other less extreme risk behaviors like
for example, alcohol use, tobacco use, uh risky sex
behaviors, and the prevention practices associated with them. Uh,
WHAT are some of the main problems with that?
Right, right. So I think that that's again something
that what we've found is that there are these,
these programs that exist in these, uh, well, there's
two, there's 22 sort of examples here that I'll
provide. The first is, um, programs that have been
in place for a long time and nobody's willing
to really take a deep dive into the data
and, and make decisions about whether the these programs
are effective or not. Here in the United States,
there's a program called DARE, and it's a drug
and alcohol prevention program. It was designed um to
be delivered by law enforcement officers, which may be
the, like the first part of where it went
wrong, um. Uh, AND it was really a program
designed to do two things. One is, um, teach
the, the, the, some of the negative, uh, effects
of drugs and alcohol, particularly, um, long-term use or,
or abuse. Uh, SO, so like teaching the, the
long-term negative impacts, and then And this may sound
silly to people who don't, who aren't from the
United States or don't know dare, but encourage kids
to just say no. And in fact, that was
Nancy Reagan, Ronald Reagan's wife, President Reagan's wife in
the 80s. That was her big thing. Her campaign
was just say no. So it was these two
parts. One is like, OK, here's the all the
negative effects of drugs and alcohol, and then because
of those negative effects, you should just say no.
Um AND it was implemented starting in the, in
the um in the 80s. Um I was, I'm
a little too old to have gone through a
DARE program. Um, AS a kid myself, but I've
seen the DARE program being implemented. Um, WHAT we
found in, in the research was that it just
wasn't very effective. Um, IN fact, what it actually
did was when we did pre-post tests, we found
that use actually increased slightly after the delivery of
a DARE program. Uh, WHY did it persist? Well,
some suggest maybe there was some political pressure. This
is being rolled out by law enforcement. Um, 111,
idea is that nobody really rigorously evaluate. IT, and
so all of the evidence was anecdotal, like, oh
yeah, I think it works. Like administ principals, school
principals saying, oh yeah, I think it works, when,
when in fact, there was no like rigorous evaluation
of whether it worked or not. So that's like
one example, the DARE program. Um, THE other one
is, uh, the, the use of infant simulator dolls
in like sex education. Uh, I don't know if
they have that in, in Europe or around the
world, but essentially, it's a mechanical doll that um
is supposed to imitate what it's like to have
to care for an infant. So, Um, at certain
times of the day, it's all, it's, you know,
all electronic and now with our high tech technology,
it's even um more, um, incredible what they do,
but at certain times of the day, the, the,
in the simulator doll will cry, um, at certain
times of the day, the infants, uh, and so
the, the, the students, so these are given to
high school. Students. And so the student then needs
to sort of see, OK, is the, do I
need to change the diaper? Is it time for
feeding? And so, uh, kids are given these teenagers,
uh, in the United States are given these infant
simulator dolls, and they are, um, they're supposed to
have them with them almost, uh, you know, all
the time for, uh, some amount of weeks. Um.
The the idea is, I think, in theory is
actually not bad. Like, OK, this is what it's
like to actually have a, a baby. It's and
it's not easy, and you can't always give the
baby to, you know, your parent to care for
her cause they are doing that. And then actually,
you'd have a lot of schools would have the,
these high school kids carry these these infant dolls
around with them at school. Um, AND then what
do you do if you play a sport and
you've got practice after school, or, you know, or
you play an instrument and you have lessons. And
so, it, it, it's really, it's, it's again, in
theory, there's some, uh, there there's some interesting ways
to make sense of this, um. The, the problem
is it's really it's, it's been tried as a
way to deter kids from having sex and then,
uh, you know, one of the consequences of, well,
unprotected sex could be having a baby. And so
that's where it's, you know, that's the, the, the,
the bottom line. For these, these infant simulator dolls.
Uh, WHAT we find is that with or without
infant simulator dolls, at least here in the United
States, teen pregnancy rates have actually gone down. Um,
IS that what that's a function of, I don't
know, but it's certainly not a function of infant
simulator dolls. The, the, here's the interesting thing about
it, and it gets where I think sometimes schools
need to be very careful. Obviously, these things cost
a lot of money. There's a lot of technology
in them and so they cost a lot of
money. And so the companies that produce these infant
simulator dolls, they promote them, right? They, they're these,
they will say in their literature, these are effective,
this is, these are the outcomes. But when you,
when you do some digging, what we find is
that they're really just snake oil salesmen. Trying to
make money off of uh what they believe are
education's deep pockets, meaning they've got education has lots
of money and they can, they can make money
off of, of education. So, uh, those are two
examples of those sort of the other risky behaviors
and some of the pseudoscience behind them. Mhm.
So now talking a little bit about cognitive assessment,
IQ tests are of course very frequently used. So
what would you say are the most common claims
made about them that do not have much scientific
support?
Yeah, this is an interesting one because in recent
years, it's the the research that's been um published
really has made for some significant changes in how
we evaluate kids, particularly kids with um learning disabilities.
So, Um, IQ tests, uh, cognitive assessments, um, they,
they, uh, generally speaking, there's lots of different types
of them, but generally speaking, They they're, they're pretty
good at predicting how, how you'll do in school,
like in, in a, in a, in a kindergarten
through 12th grade school environment. Um, BUT, but it's
pretty rough. I mean, it's not gonna get a
fine points as well. You'll get an A and
you'll get a B and, you know, you'll struggle
with math and you'll do really well with um
language arts and it's, it's not that good. It's
a, it's a crude instrument. Um. It's, it's used
to identify individuals with intellectual disability, um, and it's,
and it's a good part of a, of a,
of a comprehensive evaluation. When, when we look at
children and, and, uh, with intellectual disability, we wanna
look, of course, at more than just their cognitive
functioning or intelligence. We want to look at other
things, um, you know, are they able to kind
of uh care for themselves? What's their communication like,
those sorts of things. Um, WHERE it became problematic,
uh, and, and this is not just in the
United States, this was around the world, is when
we started to look at using, uh, IQ tests
to, um, identify kids with learning disabilities. IQ tests
do not have in them, um, academic assessment. There,
there, that's not part of an IQ test. Um,
IQ test does have vocabulary, uh, it does have,
um, uh, which is, which is a, a predictor
of learning to read or reading well, but it's,
they don't have academic assessments, yet we use them
to make decisions about kids with learning disabilities. And
moreover, what was going on was We would look
at subtests. So, uh, uh, an IQ test, for
example, may have 12 subtests. Um, AND what we
would do is we would look at the specific
subtests and make comparisons. So, you know, you might
have gotten a, a 6 on this subtest, but
a 10 on that subtest, and what, what, what
school psychology and clinical psychology was doing was they
were making claims about that difference. Now, there's a
couple of problems. One is that there's no empirical
support for a lot of what people were suggesting.
Um, IN fact, they, they were, you know, as
I was talking earlier about the uh pathology bias,
um, that, that sort of became a problem here
where we would say, well, you got a 10
on that subtest and a 6 on that subtest,
that difference is a problem. When we'd look at
the population, we'd find that 50% of the population
had a similar difference. Um, SO that was a
problem. The other problem is as we get with
IQ tests, as we look at the subtests, the,
the reliability is, is problematic, um, to, to some
degree, meaning that they're just less reliable when we
start to dig down into these subtests. And so
making decisions about subtests that may not have a
lot of reliability can be problematic and And again,
it was being used mostly for uh making decisions
about kids uh and learning disabilities, when in fact,
we have many, many other assessments that are way
more helpful at determining whether a kid um is
struggling academically in the school curriculum. Mhm.
So tell us now about projective drawings. What are
they, how are they used and what are some
of the main and supported claims made about them?
Mhm. So that was one of the myths that
we found that school psychologists were, were apt to
believing. So the idea that you can use children's
drawings to um make inferences about them and to
understand the underlying causes of their behavior. Um, PROJECTIVE
drawings, um, and, and projective assessments in general. So,
like the Rorschach, a lot of people are familiar
with the Rorschach, um, the Rorschach and like inkblot
tests and the, uh, and, and drawings. They're, they're
classified as this larger group of projective assessments. And
so the the idea there is that Um, we
wanna get information from a person about their psychological,
um, uh, functioning, and we assume that they can't
Tell us that information. It's not that they're nonverbal,
it's that it's hidden deep somewhere inside them, and
that, uh, because we can't get that information from
an interview, uh, what we can do is we
can provide them with these ambiguous stimuli, for example,
an ink blot, or we can ask like a
child to draw us a picture. Um, AND from
those, their responses, so the, the responses to what
you see in the inkblot or, or what the
child draws, we can make inferences about their, uh,
psychological functioning and, and understand their, their behavior. Um.
The, there's a couple of claims that are made
about projective drawings with kids that that's probably worth
highlighting. Uh, THE first is that they are useful
in, um, well, well, the first is that they,
that they're, they're reliable, that, that the information you
get from a child's drawings and the interpretations you
make are reliable and Uh, what we find is
that just not, is not the case. In fact,
when we ask kids to draw pictures, uh, say
we ask them a common one is the house
tree person. So, uh, we asked them to draw
a house, a tree, and a person. And so,
what we find is that when we ask the
the kids, uh, multiple times over the course of,
say, two weeks to draw those pictures, uh, they
draw different pictures. And so, the, the conclusion is
that maybe it's not necessarily a psychological trait that
you're assessing, but rather just sort of what they're
thinking in that moment, right? Uh, uh, MORE of
a, uh, a state characteristic. Um, THE other thought,
one of the other examples is that If a
child um draws a heavy line, like a dark
line, it suggests aggression. Um, AND there's no evidence
of that whatsoever, that you can have kids that
draw dark lines and light lines, and that there's
no meaning in that necessarily, unless the kid makes
meaning of it. Um, THE other claim is that
these projective drawings, these, these drawings that children make
are useful in diagnosis. And um they are not.
In fact, there was a study that was done
in the, the mid um 70s, um which is,
this is a good example of where we have
research, good research that comes out, but people ignore
it. Um, A study was done in the 70s
where they had children. Who had psychological disorders draw
pictures, and they had children that did not have
psychological disorders draw pictures. So they had two sets
of pictures, the, the psychological problems and the non-psychological
problems. And then they had um Experts in projective
drawings look at both sets blind. They didn't know
which which uh which picture went with which, you
know, what category. Uh, AND then they had hospital
secretaries look at the pictures. So people who are
not experts. And what they were to do is,
when they looked at a picture, they were to
say, yes, this child has a psychological disorder. They
didn't have to say what psychological disorder. They just
had to say, yes, this child has a psychological
disorder, or no, this child, based on their picture
does not have a psychological disorder. And you, you
see where this is going, right? The experts, they
had about a 45% hit rate. So less than
50% of the time, they were accurate in identifying
whether the picture was drawn by a kid with
a psychological disorder or without a psychological disorder. The
hospital secretaries, 67% of the time they were correct.
So, you know, is, are these projective drawings useful
for diagnosis? No. Um, IN fact, how we even
interpret these is, is up for a lot of
debate at this point. Now, I will say we
can, we can ask in a, in a school
or a clinical setting, we can ask kids to
draw pictures as part of a rapport building, but
using the content of those pictures to make inferences
is problematic. Mhm.
So let's tackle now a very common one, learning
styles. I mean, is there any evidence at all
for the existence of different kinds of learning styles?
Yeah, that's a really good one. AND, and, and
here's one of the reasons why I'm assuming there's
sort of an international audience here. This is, this
is a, this is not a um pseudo-scientific idea
that's specific to the United States, probably like the
open classrooms, for example. Um, THERE was a, there
was a study that was done, um, uh, and
I'm looking at the number. I want to get
the percent right, um. So looking at whether you
use learning styles. So, so let me just take
a step back, what learning styles are. So it's
the idea that you, that you learn best visually,
uh, auditorily, uh, kinesiology, like in terms of touch
tactically. Um, AND so, so that, that, that based
on your style, your preferred style, that's how you
should be taught. So if your preferred style is,
uh, visual, then, you know, seeing lots of things
is gonna be more effective in terms of your
learning. Um. The, the, the, so let me just
say just how widespread this belief is. Um, SO
if you look at uh teachers in the United
Kingdom, they, cause they survey teachers and they ask,
you know, do you use learning styles, um, in
terms of understanding your students and, and preparing lessons
for them, um, just under 3 quarters, just under
75% said yes, they do. Um, AND, and that's
been replicated around the, the world in terms of
teachers' use of, uh, learning styles. Uh, HERE in
the United States, you've got almost 30 states actually
in their teacher education standards, but learning styles needs
to be taught. To students. I mean, that's, you,
you know, you talk about a, a major problem,
that's a major problem. Um, THE, the research is
very, very clear. Uh, THE use of, um, of
learning styles, it does not matter one bit in
terms of effective teaching. Um, IN fact, it's best
to provide kids with multiple mediums in terms of,
you know, the content, so they, they should be
able to hear it and see it, and, and
manipulate it. Um, THAT tends to be the most
effective way to teach. And, um, saying that, well,
we, we, if we know a kid's preferred learning
style or the learning style that maybe we think
is preferred, um, and using that only as the
only mechanism by, by which we teach that child,
um, we're actually gonna do harm there because we
know that a combination of approaches is most effective.
So let me ask you now about motivational theories.
I mean, what are motivational theories and what are
some of the most common misconceptions and myths about
them in the school context?
Right. Yeah, there, there's lots of motivational theories and
we could probably spend a whole, our whole, you
know, time together talking about motivational theories. One of
the common motivational theories is self-determination theory. That, uh,
we're motivated to uh engage in different things in
order to fulfill some sort of, uh, uh, um,
goal. I mean, it, you know, it's very similar
to what goal setting uh theory is very similar
there. Um, SO there's lots and lots of motivation.
THEORIES. What, what's relevant for schools and education and,
and working with kids and adolescents is this, this
idea that we have um this dichotomous uh notion
of motivation in terms of intrinsic motivation and extrinsic
motivation. Uh, INTRINSIC motivation is that internally, you're motivated
to, to, to engage in a behavior or complete
a task. Uh, EXTERNAL motivation is that it's external.
You're getting something to, to do the task, right?
So, you know, I go to work. Uh, uh,
YOU know, Monday morning, and, um, I really love
my job and I get a lot of, um,
uh, reinforcement for my job, uh, but I also
get paid to come, right? And so, the, the,
the, uh, you know, the idea for, in the
world of schools and with kids is that Uh,
intrinsic motivation is valued over, uh, extrinsic motivation. In
fact, if we extrinsically motivate kids, uh, by giving
them rewards, for example, for their performance or effort,
that we actually may be harming their intrinsic motivation,
thereby creating problems as they, you know, get out
of school and have to do things where maybe
they aren't extrinsically motivated. The first problem with this
whole line of thinking is that Nobody's really studied
the idea of intrinsic and extrinsic motivation as actual
uh theories of motivation, um. In fact, um, nobody's
really defined, clearly defined these two terms. Um, IF
you look in the literature, there's going to be
lots of references to intrinsic and extrinsic motivation, but
people define them very differently. So that's the first
problem. The second problem is, you know, especially with
intrinsic motivation, how do we know? Like, how can
we look into somebody. And see that they're intrinsically
motivated. And I would argue the same with extrinsic,
like, you either do the task or you don't.
What, what are we looking for in terms of
this intrinsic and extrinsic thing that exists? And so
there's lots of questions, uh, professionally and and and
and scientifically about, like, where do these things actually
lie? Like, how do I actually measure intrinsic motivation?
Um, AND then third, this, this whole idea of
intrinsic and extrinsic motivation, uh, came from a study
that was done in 1973. Uh, THEY gave children,
uh, the task of drawing something. So they got,
they were doing some art, if you will. And,
um, what they said, they had two groups, and
one group, they said, just draw. The other group,
they said, draw, and then how much you have
on the page will determine some kind of reward.
So there was this like promise for a reward.
Um, AND what the researchers found was that the
kids that were told to just draw. Produced way
more content than the kids who were told, if
you just draw this much, you'll get a reward.
In fact, they, they just drew that much. Nobody
went above and beyond. Um, AND so based on
that one study, there was this idea that was
promoted that intrinsic motivation is better than extrinsic motivation,
and in fact, extrinsic rewards can harm kids' performance.
Now, it's one study. Um, IT'S, the kids were
told ahead of time what the standard was, and
that if they met the standard, they'd get the
reward. They weren't told anything about going above and
beyond the standard, meaning perhaps they got more if
they produced more, right? If they drew more on
the page, they'd get more of the reward. Um,
THAT was not part of this whatsoever. And so
there's a lot of questions about, you know, coming
up with conclusions about one type of motivation being
better than the other based on one study that
largely hadn't been replicated. And in fact, research comes
out pretty regularly that suggests that when we do
reward kids for particularly effort, Their effort improves, and
we know that when we reinforce kids' behavior, that
the behavior increases in its frequency or quality. So
there's like all this other research out there that
really um uh supports the idea that, you know
what, rewarding kids isn't harmful at all, yet there's
this idea that rewarding kids is harmful, and it
comes from a couple of, of well spoken, um,
proponents of Doing away with rewards in schools, or
doing away with rewards with kids. In fact, I
heard, I, I presented a conference a couple of
years ago. Um, THESE were all, um, uh, family,
uh uh uh social service workers, so like social
workers and, and counselors, and the keynote speaker was
talking about kids or people are punished by rewards.
Um, AGAIN, not citing any research, and although he
did suggest that in businesses, when companies reward employees,
their, the employee's performance goes down, that he made
that claim in the, in the talk. Now, one
of the great things about having a, having a
computer in your hand at a conference is you
can Google something. So I, of course, Googled uh
rewards, uh, business, performance, something like that. I think
I had 3 terms. And then I put research
at the end. So I had 4 things in
my Google search, and I it came back, the
1st 3 things that came back were meta-analysis indicating
that businesses that reward performance or effort actually see
an increase in employee productivity. So, I, you know,
I, of course, I didn't raise my hand and
say, hey, I got, I got something here for
you, but that that person was speaking to an
audience of about 500 people and was speaking very
well. And my guess is that 499 people in
that audience left believing that rewards harm harm is
harm are harmful for children. When in fact, sometimes
that's what we have available to us. Not every
kid goes to school and is willing to behave
the best they can. And so, the alternative is
we provide reinforcement. And, and I would advocate that
the rewards or the reinforcement should be acknowledgment. They
don't always have to be pieces of candy, uh,
but certainly attention and praise and those kinds of
things uh are important, as well as Not just
rewarding performance, but also rewarding effort. Like I, I
see you worked really hard at that. I know
you, you didn't get all the questions right, but
your effort is something that I noticed. Great job.
Mhm. Great. So let me just ask you two
more general questions here before we wrap up. So,
what would you say that teachers, educators, and even
school psychologists can do with all this information? How
can they apply it?
Right, I, I, it's a great question. That, that's
the, like what, you know, so what's the point
of all this, right? And so I think there's
a few things. I think the first is, um,
You know, certainly taking the, the, the pseudoscientific practices,
the, the fringe science that we present, and re-evaluating
their own practice, right? So, for school psychologists, or
teachers or administrators, or anybody who, any of those
topics that are relevant, that they, they, they, they
evaluate their own practices with, with kids and adolescents
in a school context. I think that's the first
thing I would say is important. The second thing
is taking a, uh, uh, a, you know, a
real deep look at the practices that that occur
in schools and Asking why are these pseudoscientific practices
continuing. Um, THE, the, there's a, um, Uh, a
researcher, Ian Ianides, who came up with the term
self-correction and suggested that psychology is not very good
at self-correcting, meaning practices continue despite research coming out
that dispel the the uh veracity or validity of
those practices. Um, MEDICINE is very good at self-correcting.
Like, we, we don't, you know, we don't have
leeches anymore when we have a, a suspected disease.
Um, SCIENCE in general, like physics is really good
at self-correcting. Um, Newton came out with his, you
know, laws of motion and his theories of gravity,
and then Einstein came around later and added to
that. But, but it made everyone sort of rethink
things, and Psychology is not so great at that.
You know, we've been able to over a century,
determine that much of what Freud promoted um is
not scientifically supported, yet, Freud lives on in our
textbooks, in our teaching, and our practices. So I,
I think what educators and school psychologists and school
administrators can do. I, again, take a deep look
at the practices that you're engaging in currently and,
and evaluate them. Uh, UNDERSTAND, OK, is this, does
this work and, and evaluating them in a rigorous
way, not just, well, what does the research say,
but also what's happening in my classroom or what's
happening in my school, or what's happening with my
practice when I evaluate what it, what I'm doing.
And then the third thing I think that's really
important is advocacy, you know, advocating for um the
use of evidence-based practices in schools. Um, YOU know,
we have a, a chapter in the book on
developmental disabilities, neurodivergence, and specifically that these, these, um,
dubious practices that are, um, used with kids with
autism. Mhm. And so we need to advocate for
the use of evidence-based practices and and it can
be sometimes a a difficult position to put yourself
in, uh, because these things have been going on
for a long time where people are very passionate
about what they're doing, and, and I think we
still need advocates in in those in those places
to um promote. Effective evidence-based practices. So I think
those are the things I think that teachers and
educators can really do, uh, in school psychologists. And
then finally, I, I, you know, I, I, I
presented on this just recently, and I talked a
lot about, um, just being critical thinkers. I think
that's important. And being um conscientious of those um
cognitive biases, those cognitive errors that we make, and
the heuristics that we practice, being aware of those
and checking those biases that you may have, um,
as you're evaluating evidence for different practices that happen
in schools. Mhm.
But because we're always learning new things about everything
related to school psychology, I mean, new knowledge is
always getting developed and stuff like that. What are
the most reliable sources for school psychologists, teachers, parents,
and other people that might be interested in this
topic?
Yeah, that's a, that's a really, again, I think
about that question, I think we could do a
whole session just on that. Um, BUT, but to
boil it down, I think the, the most reliable
sources generally are um You know, if I think
about research, it's, it's research that comes from peer
reviewed, uh, places. So the journals, books, um, conferences
where there's, where there's a review process, a scientific
review process in place that is able to, um,
Uh one, provide feedback on, on the, on the
research, but also screen. But that doesn't mean there's
going to be nonsense that's promoted in these places.
Not all journals are created equally. There are not
all fields are created equally. Um, SO I think
it's, um, I think it's not necessarily just the
Sources that are important, but it's training yourself to,
to be, to have this sort of healthy skepticism.
And, and as you begin to look at the
evidence that's out there, and, and then the evidence
could be even on the internet, but, but evaluate
the evidence critically or skeptically. Think about how that
um think about what are the implications of these
of these different types of studies, um, but, but
also perhaps equally important is thinking about um What,
what, what's, what, who's speaking about this stuff and,
and being very, very cautious. Now, you can be
skeptical and then become cynical very quickly. So I
think that in, and Carl Sagan said this, it's
the balance between skepticism and openness. So that when,
you know, if you are if you've been doing
something for a long time, if you're a teacher
and you've been using a particular teaching approach for
a long time. And you begin thinking, well, I'm
a little skeptical about whether this is working, you
know, rigorously evaluate it and be open to the
possibilities that that rigorous evaluation may um may find.
Mhm. Great. So, the book is again investigating school
psychology, pseudoscience, science, and controversies. I'm, of course, leaving
a link to it in the description of the
interview. And Dr. Axelrod, just before we go apart
from the book, where can people find your work
on the internet?
Yeah, I think, um, I've, I've done a lot
of research uh in child and adolescent psychology, particularly,
um, the evidence-based interventions. So I think in the,
uh, scientific literature around school psychology, clinical psychology, and
pediatric psychology, I think is really valuable. I'm at
the University of Wisconsin-Eau Claire. I direct something called
the Human Development Center. We are an on-campus, um,
clinic, so we provide clinical services to children, adolescents,
and families in the community. Um, AND it's students
that are actually providing the services under the supervision
of, uh, credential faculty. So hopefully, we're teaching them
to, uh, use evidence-based practices, but, um, I bring
that up because you can go to the UW
Eau Claire website UWEC.edu um and you can Google
me and you can find a lot of the
work that I've done and a lot of the
work that my team has done.
Great. So, Doctor Axelrod, thank you so much for
taking the time to come on the show and
thank you for the very informative conversation. And
thank you for having me. I, I appreciate being
here.
Hi guys, thank you for watching this interview until
the end. If you liked it, please share it,
leave a like and hit the subscription button. The
show is brought to you by Nights Learning and
Development done differently, check their website at Nights.com and
also please consider supporting the show on Patreon or
PayPal. I would also like to give a huge
thank you to my main patrons and PayPal supporters
Perergo Larsson, Jerry Mullerns, Frederick Sundo, Bernard Seyches Olaf,
Alex Adam Castle, Matthew Whitting Barno, Wolf, Tim Hollis,
Erika Lenny, John Connors, Philip Fors Connolly. Then the
Mari Robert Windegaruyasi Zup Mark Nes called in Holbrookfield
governor Michael Stormir, Samuel Andre, Francis Forti Agnseroro and
Hal Herzognun Macha Joan Labray and Samuel Corriere, Heinz,
Mark Smith, Jore, Tom Hummel, Sardus France David Sloan
Wilson, asila dearraujoro and Roach Diego London Correa. Yannick
Punter Darusmani Charlotte blinikol Barbara Adamhn Pavlostaevsky nale back
medicine, Gary Galman Sam of Zallirianeioltonin John Barboza, Julian
Price, Edward Hall Edin Bronner, Douglas Fre Francaortolotti Gabrielon
Scorteus Slelitsky, Scott Zacharyish Tim Duffyani Smith John Wieman.
Daniel Friedman, William Buckner, Paul Georgianneau, Luke Lovai Giorgio
Theophanous, Chris Williamson, Peter Wozin, David Williams, Diocosta, Anton
Eriksson, Charles Murray, Alex Shaw, Marie Martinez, Coralli Chevalier,
bungalow atheists, Larry D. Lee Junior, old Erringbo. Sterry
Michael Bailey, then Sperber, Robert Gray, Zigoren, Jeff McMann,
Jake Zu, Barnabas radix, Mark Campbell, Thomas Dovner, Luke
Neeson, Chris Storry, Kimberly Johnson, Benjamin Galbert, Jessica Nowicki,
Linda Brandon, Nicholas Carlsson, Ismael Bensleyman. George Eoriatis, Valentin
Steinman, Perrolis, Kate van Goller, Alexander Aubert, Liam Dunaway,
BR Masoud Ali Mohammadi, Perpendicular John Nertner, Ursula Gudinov,
Gregory Hastings, David Pinsoff, Sean Nelson, Mike Levin, and
Jos Net. A special thanks to my producers. These
are Webb, Jim, Frank Lucas Steffinik, Tom Venneden, Bernardin
Curtis Dixon, Benedic Muller, Thomas Trumbull, Catherine and Patrick
Tobin, Giancarlo Montenegroal Ni Cortiz and Nick Golden, and
to my executive producers Matthew Levender, Sergio Quadrian, Bogdan
Kanivets, and Rosie. Thank you for all.